Move user_input_methods guide (#30646)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn/forms/user_input_methods/index.md

slug: Learn/Forms/User_input_methods
page-type: guide
---

Web forms require user input. When designing web forms, or really any web content, it's important to consider how users interact with their devices and browsers. Web user input goes beyond simple mouse and keyboard: think of touchscreens for example.

In this article, we take a look at the different ways users interact with forms and other web content, and provides recommendations for managing user input, real-world examples, and links to further information for anyone needing more detailed information on the underlying technologies.

As you develop more complex and interactive forms or other user interactions, there are many HTML features and JavaScript APIs you may want to investigate that are both directly or tangentially related. For example, you may want to create form controls needing non-form controls to be content editable. You will likely want to support touch events or may need to determine or control the screen's orientation, make a form take up the full screen, or enable drag and drop features. This guide introduces all these features, and directs you to more information on each topic.

> To provide good user experience to the greatest number of users, you need to support multiple input methods, including mouse, keyboard, finger touch and so on. Available input mechanisms depend on the capabilities of the device running the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide a good experience to the greatest number of users, you need to support multiple input methods, including mouse, keyboard, finger touch, and so on. Available input mechanisms depend on the capabilities of the device running the application.
```

This paragraph alludes to touch events, meaning that maybe we don't need the mention of touch events in the previous paragraph, but I wasn't 100% sure about this. Mentioning it in case you think it needs further action.

> You should always be mindful of keyboard accessibility — many web users only use keyboard to navigate websites and apps, and locking them out of your functionality is a bad idea.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should always be mindful of keyboard accessibility — many web users only use the keyboard to navigate websites and apps, and locking them out of your functionality is a bad idea.
```

## Topics covered

> - To support touch screen displays, [touch events](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Touch_events) interpret finger activity on touch-based user interfaces, from mobile devices, to refrigerator panels, to museum kiosk displays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To support touch screen displays, [touch events](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Touch_events) interpret finger activity on touch-based user interfaces from mobile devices, to refrigerator panels, to museum kiosk displays.
```

> - The [Fullscreen API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fullscreen_API) allows you to display your content in fullscreen mode, which is needed if your form is being served on aa refrigerator or museum kiosk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [Fullscreen API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fullscreen_API) allows you to display your content in fullscreen mode, which is needed if your form is being served on a refrigerator or museum kiosk.
```

> - When you need to create a custom form control, like a rich-text editor, the [`contentEditable`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/contenteditable) attribute enables creating editable controls out of normally non-editable HTML elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When you need to create a custom form control, like a rich-text editor, the [`contentEditable`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/contenteditable) attribute enables creating editable controls from normally non-editable HTML elements.
```

> - The [Drag and Drop API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_Drag_and_Drop_API) let users move elements, which can help improve the user experience when it comes to selecting files for upload or reordering content modules within a page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [Drag and Drop API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_Drag_and_Drop_API) allows users to drag elements around a page and drop them in different locations. This can help improve the user experience when it comes to selecting files for upload or reordering content modules within a page.
```

- When screen orientation matters for your layout, you can use [CSS media queries](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/orientation) to style your forms based on the browser orientation, or even use the [Screen Orientation API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS_Object_Model/Managing_screen_orientation) to read the screen orientation state and perform other actions.

The following sections provide a set of recommendations and best practices for enabling the widest possible set of users to use your websites and applications.

## Supporting common input mechanisms

### Keyboard

> Most users will use a keyboard to enter data into your form controls. Some will also use the keyboard to navigate to those form controls. To be accessible, and for better user experience, it's important to properly [label all form controls](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Your_first_form#the_label_input_and_textarea_elements). When each form control has a correctly associated {{htmlelement("label")}}, your form will fully accessible to all; notably anyone navigating your form with a keyboard and a screen reader, and possibly no screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most users will use a keyboard to enter data into your form controls. Some will also use the keyboard to navigate to those form controls. To be accessible, and for better user experience, it's important to properly [label all form controls](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Your_first_form#the_label_input_and_textarea_elements). When each form control has a correctly associated {{htmlelement("label")}}, your form will be fully accessible to all, most notably anyone navigating your form with a keyboard, a screen reader, and possibly no screen at all.
```

### Finger touch

To provide additional support for touchscreen devices, it's a good practice to take into consideration the different capabilities in terms of screen resolution and user input. [Touch events](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Touch_events) can help you implement interactive elements and common interaction gestures on touchscreen devices.

If you want to use touch events, you need to add event listeners and specify handler functions, which will be called when the event gets fired:

```js
element.addEventListener("touchstart", handleStart, false);
element.addEventListener("touchcancel", handleCancel, false);
element.addEventListener("touchend", handleEnd, false);
element.addEventListener("touchmove", handleMove, false);
```

where `element` is the DOM element you want to register the touch events on.

> **Note:** For further information about what you can do with touch events, please read our [touch events guide](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Touch_events).

### Pointer Events

> Mice aren't the only pointing devices. Your user's devices may incorporate multiple forms of input, like mouse, finger touch, and pen input. Each of these pointers has a different size. The [Pointer Events API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Pointer_events) may come in handy if you need to manage events across devices by normalizing the handling of each one. A pointer can be any point of contact on the screen made by a mouse cursor, pen, touch (including multi-touch), or other pointing input device. The events for handling generic pointer input look a lot like those for mouse: `pointerdown`, `pointermove`, `pointerup`, `pointerover`, `pointerout`, etc. The [`PointerEvent` interface](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PointerEvent) provides all the details you may want to capture about the pointer device, including its size, pressure, and angle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mice aren't the only pointing devices. Your user's devices may incorporate multiple forms of input, like mouse, finger touch, and pen input. Each of these pointers has a different size. The [Pointer Events API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Pointer_events) may come in handy if you need to manage events across devices by normalizing the handling of each one. A pointer can be any point of contact on the screen made by a mouse cursor, pen, touch (including multi-touch), or other pointing input device.

The events for handling generic pointer input look a lot like those for mouse: `pointerdown`, `pointermove`, `pointerup`, `pointerover`, `pointerout`, etc. The [`PointerEvent` interface](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PointerEvent) provides all the details you may want to capture about the pointer device, including its size, pressure, and angle.
```

## Implement controls

### Screen Orientation

> If you need slightly different layouts depending on whether the user is in portrait or landscape mode, you can use [CSS media queries](/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/CSS_layout/Media_queries#media_feature_rules) to determine the orientation and nest CSS for different layouts or form control widths based on the size or orientation of the screen when [styling web forms](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Styling_web_forms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need slightly different layouts depending on whether the user is in portrait or landscape mode, you can use [CSS media queries](/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/CSS_layout/Media_queries#media_feature_rules) to define CSS for different layouts or form control widths based on the size or orientation of the screen when [styling web forms](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Styling_web_forms).
```

---
title: User input methods and controls
slug: Learn/Forms/User_input_methods
page-type: guide
---

Web forms require user input. In designing web forms, or really any web content, it's important to consider how users interact with their devices and browsers. Web user input goes beyond simple mouse and keyboard: think of touchscreens for example.

In this article, we take a look at the different ways users interact with web content, and provides recommendations for managing user input, real-world examples, and links to further information for anyone needing more detailed information on the underlying technologies.

> As you develop more complex and interactive forms or other user interactions, there are many HTML features and JavaScript APIs you may want to investigate, including making elements [content editable](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/contenteditable), supporting [touch events](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Touch_events), controlling the user's [pointer device](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Pointer_Lock_API), controlling the [screen's orientation](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS_Object_Model/Managing_screen_orientation), making the content [fullscreen](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fullscreen_API), using [drag and drop](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_Drag_and_Drop_API) for file uploads, and more.

Author: Reworded it, and removed the links: made it more of an intro to the next section rather than a summary. keeping content editable because it is a necessary feature in creating custom form controls. dropped pointer lock.

> As you develop more complex and interactive forms or other user interactions, there are many HTML features and JavaScript APIs you may want to investigate, including making elements [content editable](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/contenteditable), supporting [touch events](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Touch_events), controlling the user's [pointer device](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Pointer_Lock_API), controlling the [screen's orientation](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS_Object_Model/Managing_screen_orientation), making the content [fullscreen](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fullscreen_API), using [drag and drop](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_Drag_and_Drop_API) for file uploads, and more.

Reviewer: Cool, this reads much better

- The [Fullscreen API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fullscreen_API) helps you in displaying your content in fullscreen mode.
- Using features such as [`contentEditable``](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/contenteditable) elements you can implement fast rich-text editors.
- The [Drag and Drop API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_Drag_and_Drop_API) let users move elements, which can help improve the user experience when it comes to selecting files for upload or reordering content modules within a page.
- When screen orientation matters for your layout, you can use [CSS media queries](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/orientation) to style your forms based on the browser orientation, or even use the [Screen Orientation API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS_Object_Model/Managing_screen_orientation) to read the screen orientation state and perform other actions.

You should always be mindful of keyboard accessibility — many web users only use keyboard to navigate websites and apps, and locking them out of your functionality is a bad idea.

The following is a set of recommendations and best practices for users can use your websites and applications:

### Supporting common input mechanisms

#### Keyboard

> Most users will use a keyboard to enter data into your form controls. Some will also use the keyboard to navigate to those form controls. To be accessible, and for better user experience, it's important to properly [label all form controls](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Your_first_form#the_label_input_and_textarea_elements). When each form control has a correctly associated {{htmlelement("label")}}, your form will be keyboard navigable.

Author: I meant that it would be navigable o those with only a keyboard as they'll know what the form control is for, even if they can't see the content around it. updated.

> Most users will use a keyboard to enter data into your form controls. Some will also use the keyboard to navigate to those form controls. To be accessible, and for better user experience, it's important to properly [label all form controls](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Your_first_form#the_label_input_and_textarea_elements). When each form control has a correctly associated {{htmlelement("label")}}, your form will be keyboard navigable.

Reviewer: ok, makes sense

element.addEventListener("touchmove", handleMove, false);
```

where `element` is the DOM element you want to register the touch events on.

> **Note:** For further information about what you can do with touch events, please read our [touch events guide](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Touch_events).

#### Pointer Events

Mice aren't the only pointing devices. Your user's devices may incorporate multiple forms of input, like mouse, finger touch and pen input. Each of these pointers has a different size. The [Pointer Events API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Pointer_events) may come in handy if you need to manage events across devices by normalizing the handling of each one. A pointer can be any point of contact on the screen made by a mouse cursor, pen, touch (including multi-touch), or other pointing input device. The events for handling generic pointer input look a lot like those for mouse: `pointerdown`, `pointermove`, `pointerup`, `pointerover`, `pointerout`, etc. The [pointerEvent interface](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PointerEvent) provides all the details you may want to capture about the pointer device, including the size, pressure, and angle of the pointer event.

### Implement controls

> #### Pointer lock

Author: removed

When screen orientation matters for your form, you can read the screen orientation state, be informed when this state changes, and able to lock the screen orientation to a specific state (usually portrait or landscape) through the [Screen Orientation API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS_Object_Model/Managing_screen_orientation).

Orientation data can be retrieved through {{domxref("screenOrientation.type")}} or with CSS through the [`orientation`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_media_queries/Using_media_queries#orientation) media feature. When the screen orientation changes, the {{domxref("ScreenOrientation.change_event", "change")}} event is fired on the screen object. Locking the screen orientation is made possible by invoking the {{domxref("ScreenOrientation.lock()")}} method, while the {{domxref("ScreenOrientation.unlock()")}} method removes all the previous screen locks that have been set.

> **Note:** More information about the Screen Orientation API can be found in [Managing screen orientation](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS_Object_Model/Managing_screen_orientation).

#### Fullscreen

> In the unlikely event that you need to present your form in fullscreen mode, it is possible to do so by calling {{domxref("Element.requestFullscreen()")}} on that element:

Author: agree

```js
const elem = document.getElementById("myForm");
if (elem.requestFullscreen) {
  elem.requestFullscreen();
}
```

> **Note:** To find out more about adding fullscreen functionality your application, read our documentation about [using fullscreen mode](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fullscreen_API).

> #### Drag & Drop

Author: done

  ondragstart="event.dataTransfer.setData('text/plain', 'This text may be dragged')">
  This text <strong>may</strong> be dragged.
</div>
```

in which we:

- Set the [`draggable`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes#draggable) attribute to true on the element that you wish to make draggable
- Add a listener for the [`dragstart`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLElement/dragstart_event) event and set the drag data within this listener

> **Note:** You can find more information in the [MDN Drag & Drop documentation](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_Drag_and_Drop_API).

#### contentEditable

Generally, you should use a {{HTMLElement("textarea")}} or an appropriate {{HTMLElement("input")}} type, along with a descriptive {{HTMLElement("label")}}, within a {{HTMLElement("form")}}, to collect data from users. Form controls are not the only elements that can receive user input. Any DOM element can be made directly editable using the [`contenteditable`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes#contenteditable) attribute.

```css hidden
div {
  width: 300px;
  height: 130px;
  border: 1px solid gray;
}
```

```html
<div contenteditable="true">This text can be edited by the user.</div>
```

> If using non-semantic elements for data entry, if you are [creating your own form controls](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/How_to_build_custom_form_controls), you will need to add JavaScript and [ARIA](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA) to retrofit the element with form control functionality. The `contenteditable` attribute automatically adds the element to the document's default tabbing order, meaning the [`tabindex`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes#tabindex) attribute does not need to be added. However, the element's [`role`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/), [label](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-labelledby), and [description](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-describedby) need to be added with ARIA. JavaScript is required to handle, including [validation](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Form_validation) and [submitting](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Sending_and_retrieving_form_data) or [saving](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Sending_forms_through_JavaScript), all user-updated content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using non-semantic elements for data entry when [creating your own form controls](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/How_to_build_custom_form_controls), you will need to add JavaScript and [ARIA](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA) to retrofit the element with form control functionality. The `contenteditable` attribute automatically adds the element to the document's default tabbing order, meaning the [`tabindex`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes#tabindex) attribute does not need to be added.

There are however other aspects of your custom form's functionality that need significant work to provide an accessible experience:

- The element's [`role`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/), [label](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-labelledby), and [description](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-describedby) need to be added with ARIA.
- JavaScript is required to handle functionality such as [validation](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Form_validation), [submission](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Sending_and_retrieving_form_data), and [saving](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms/Sending_forms_through_JavaScript) of user-updated content.
```
